Title: Build Day 0
Date:  2021-05-23 15:00
---

# def
All projects begin somewhere, and this is where this one begins.

Over the next few weeks and months, I'll be building a personal
portfolio/showcase of code projects, each chosen for both personal interest
and to demonstrate my use of particular technologies, such as the web stack,
machine learning, or programming interface development.

# \_\_doc\_\_

Why?

Well, firstly, a lot of the code I write is for the company I work for,
and so while the things I can do has expanded significantly over the last few
years, none of it is particularly reflected in my GitHub profile, and I'd like
to bring that up to date.

Secondly, I want to create a coding space for myself that is less restricted
by deadlines and "product" pressure, to try and focus on best practices,
and to exercise older programming skills I used to use regularly (such as
in training neural networks).

And lastly, I think the projects I've lined up are going to be a lot of fun,
and by tackling some of them I hope I can rekindle my enthusiasm for hobbyist
programming.

# \_\_call\_\_

So what are these projects to be? In order of increasing complexity:

1. This! A simple static site generator, from scratch, written in Python and
   markdown, where I can record my progress and thoughts on each project
   as I go.
2. A bit of a personal exercise, writing a simple Schrödinger equation
   solver in Python, with graphical output. If it goes well, I'll convert
   it into a web app.
3. A dinosaur family tree/cladogram, implemented as a web app using React
   and/or Redux, interactive, searchable, and live on the web.
4. A board game, called Bao, which I learned as a kid on holiday in Zanzibar,
   implemented in Rust using Bevy.
5. An open street map tile neural network tile generator, implemented in
   Python and, if all goes well, deployed as a web app.

# \_\_exit\_\_

This particular post was written before any code, and represents simply
the starting point for project 1. Next post, I'll be writing up reflections
on the implementation of this little custom static site generator. If you've
read this far, thanks! And see you next time.
